Ecological Modelling 250 (2013) 81–100

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Ecological Modelling
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ecolmodel

A hierarchical patch mosaic ecosystem model for urban landscapes:
Model development and evaluation
Chi Zhang a,b,∗ , Jianguo Wu b,c,d , Nancy B. Grimm b,d , Melissa McHale b,e , Alexander Buyantuyev c,d
a

State Key Laboratory of Desert and Oasis Ecology, Xinjiang Institute of Ecology and Geography, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Urumqi, Xinjiang, China
Global Institute of Sustainability, Arizona State University, AZ, United States
Sino-US Center for Conservation, Energy and Sustainability Science (SUCCESS), Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot 010021, China
d
School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, United States
e
College of Natural Resources, North Carolina State University, NC, United States
b
c

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 20 May 2012
Received in revised form
23 September 2012
Accepted 25 September 2012
Available online 5 December 2012
Keywords:
Process-based model
Urban ecosystem
Carbon cycle
Hierarchical patch dynamics paradigm
Phoenix metropolitan area
LTER

a b s t r a c t
Urbanization effects on ecosystem functions are both important and complex, characterized by scale multiplicity, spatial heterogeneity, and intensive human disturbances. Integrating the hierarchical structure
of urban landscape pattern with ecosystem processes through simulation modeling can facilitate our
understanding of human–environment interactions in urban environment. Current ecosystem models
often focus on plant physiological and biogeochemical processes in homogeneous land covers, incapable
of addressing the structural complexity in urban landscapes with multiple anthropogenic drivers across
a range of spatial scales. Here we present the Hierarchical Patch Mosaic-Urban Ecosystem Model (HPMUEM), a multi-scaled model that explicitly treats spatial pattern and hierarchical structure of urban
landscape by incorporating both top-down controls and bottom-up mechanisms in urban environment.
By addressing six hierarchical levels from individual plant to the urbanized region, HPM-UEM provides
a “hierarchical ladder” to scale up local ecosystem functions across the nested urban land hierarchies
(i.e., land cover, land use, landscape, and the urbanized region), and facilitate linking ecosystem processes and socioeconomic drivers. By organizing human inﬂuences in a spatially nested hierarchical
patch mosaic structure, HPM-UEM models the complex spatiotemporal pattern of multiple environmental constraints on urban ecosystem functions. The model was evaluated based on extensive datasets
developed by the Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) network, especially the Central Arizona-Phoenix
(CAP) LTER. Model testing results showed that HPM-UEM predicted both C ﬂuxes and spatial pattern of
C stocks with reasonable accuracy. HPM-UEM enabled us to assess spatial patterns and multiple-scaled
dynamics of C cycle of the urban landscape, revealing the distinct productivities and C densities of different
urban land types across different spatial scales. Sensitivity analyses indicated that future environmental changes and landscape modiﬁcations could have strong and complex effects on urban ecosystem
functions. By matching ecological processes, anthropogenic environmental controls, and land and socioeconomic dynamics based on hierarchical levels, HPM-UEM could be coupled to multiple-scaled urban
land-use models, climate models, and socioeconomic models to gain a comprehensive understanding of
urban biogeochemical cycles.
© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Humans have transformed about one-third to one-half of the
earth’s land surface, substantially altering the global biogeochemical cycle (Vitousek et al., 1997). Of different forms of land
transformation, urbanization is arguably the most profound and
complex, and has dominated land-use changes since the mid-20th
century. In the United States, for example, urban and developed
areas increased from 3.9% in 1982 to 5.2% in 1997 and were

∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +86 18690321105; fax: +86 9917885320.
E-mail address: zhchbob@gmail.com (C. Zhang).
0304-3800/$ – see front matter © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2012.09.020

projected to reach 9.2% in 2025 (Alig et al., 2004). Globally, urbanized land is expected to increase by about one million km2 over
the next 25 years (McDonald, 2008). Numerous studies have indicated that urbanization has profound impacts on the productivity
and C balance of terrestrial ecosystems from regional to continental
scales (Imhoff et al., 2004; Pataki et al., 2006; Schaldach and Alcamo,
2007; Churkina, 2008; Svirejeva-Hopkins et al., 2004; Buyantuyev
and Wu, 2009). Zhang et al. (2012) estimated that urban and developed land accounts for about 6.7–7.6% of total ecosystem C storage
within the southern United States (US), larger than the pool size of
shrubland.
Using urban vegetation to offset fossil C emissions has been
proposed as a strategy to mitigate some of the negative impacts

82

C. Zhang et al. / Ecological Modelling 250 (2013) 81–100

of urbanization (McPherson 1998; Nowak, 2006; Young, 2010;
Zhao et al., 2010). Such projects require multi-disciplinary cooperation between ecologists, urban geologists, social scientists, and
policy makers. However, urban ecologists frequently ﬁnd communication between disciplines difﬁcult due to the differences in
terminologies. For example, when ecologists mention land types,
they usually mean lands of homogeneous vegetation such as grassland or broadleaf forests. In contrast, when land-use modelers or
economists mention land types, they often refer to the usage of
the land in relation to certain socioeconomic functions (i.e., landuse), such as residential or commercial areas that consist of both
impervious surfaces and green-space. For urban management, the
C storage of an urban park is more meaningful to policy makers
than the C density of a turfgrass ecosystem. The dilemma reﬂects
the fact that ecologists work on a different research scale from the
