REVIEWS REVIEWS REVIEWS

Coordinated distributed experiments: an
emerging tool for testing global hypotheses
in ecology and environmental science
Lauchlan H Fraser1*, Hugh AL Henry2, Cameron N Carlyle1,3, Shannon R White4, Carl Beierkuhnlein5,
James F Cahill Jr4, Brenda B Casper6, Elsa Cleland7, Scott L Collins8, Jeffrey S Dukes9, Alan K Knapp10,
Eric Lind11, Ruijun Long12, Yiqi Luo13, Peter B Reich14,15, Melinda D Smith16, Marcelo Sternberg17, and
Roy Turkington3
There is a growing realization among scientists and policy makers that an increased understanding of today’s
environmental issues requires international collaboration and data synthesis. Meta-analyses have served this
role in ecology for more than a decade, but the different experimental methodologies researchers use can limit
the strength of the meta-analytic approach. Considering the global nature of many environmental issues, a
new collaborative approach, which we call coordinated distributed experiments (CDEs), is needed that will
control for both spatial and temporal scale, and that encompasses large geographic ranges. Ecological CDEs,
involving standardized, controlled protocols, have the potential to advance our understanding of general
principles in ecology and environmental science.
Front Ecol Environ 2013; 11(3): 147–155, doi:10.1890/110279 (published online 14 Dec 2012)

E

cology as a science began well over a century ago,
when it was based primarily on observational studies
(McIntosh 1985). Toward the end of the 20th century,
this led to a more experimental, reductionist approach,
focused on testing hypotheses and developing theories.
Controlled manipulative experiments have shaped our
understanding of ecological principles considerably over
the past few decades. However, although suitable for testing and developing theories, individual studies yield sitespecific information that is difficult to extrapolate to provide broad generalizations. Today, emerging globally
relevant questions in basic and applied ecology require a
reconsideration of what approaches would be best for
understanding large-scale patterns and processes. It is no

In a nutshell:
• Many environmental issues have become global problems that
require collaborative experimental research at an international
scale
• We recommend the use of coordinated distributed experiments (CDEs), standardized experiments to control for spatial
and temporal scales across a wide geographic range
• The use of CDEs will lead to more efficient international collaborations, addressing fundamental basic and applied questions in ecology and environmental science

1

Department of Biological Sciences and Natural Resource Sciences,
Thompson Rivers University, Kamloops, Canada *(lfraser@tru.ca);
2
Department of Biology, University of Western Ontario, London,
Canada; 3Department of Botany and Biodiversity Research Centre,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada (continued on
p155)
© The Ecological Society of America

longer sufficient to ask whether global warming can alter
plant or animal growth, whether acid rain has impacts on
aquatic trophic structure, or whether habitat fragmentation reduces biodiversity. Society requires more than theory; it requires an understanding of “how, how much, and
when”. Our ability to extrapolate the results from experimental approaches has been chiefly limited by the scopes
and scales of the studies that are practically and logistically feasible. For this reason, there have been shifts in
methodologies in ecology and the environmental sciences; for example, we have seen a return to observational studies through the use of technological advances
in the monitoring and analysis of data (Collins et al.
2006; Sagarin and Pauchard 2010). Another technique
that has become widely used is meta-analysis, a quantitative approach to reviewing, integrating, and summarizing
large numbers of independent studies (Gurevitch and
Hedges 2001).
During the past two decades, a progressive increase in
the use of meta-analysis has advanced most academic disciplines, including ecology and the environmental sciences. The strength of the meta-analytic approach lies in
the objective and quantitative statistical methodology
that allows the synthesis of large numbers of studies
(Gurevitch et al. 1992; Arnqvist and Wooster 1995;
Harrison 2011). A few examples of ecological topics that
have been ideally suited to the meta-analytic approach
include the question of whether amphibian declines are a
worldwide phenomenon (Houlahan et al. 2000), the
effect of dispersal on species diversity (Cadotte 2006), the
response of ecosystem nitrogen (N) cycles to N addition
(Lu et al. 2011), the effects of grazing on plant traits (Díaz
et al. 2007), the relationship between plant species richwww.frontiersinecology.org

147

Coordinated distributed experiments

148

(a)

LH Fraser et al.
(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Examples of different rainfall manipulation methods conducted on grasslands with corresponding map locations in Figure 3:
(a) Germany (30), (b) Israel (31), and (c) Canada (15).

ness and productivity (Mittelbach et al. 2001), the
effects of controlling plant traits on litter decomposition
rates (Cornwell et al. 2008), and grassland biomass
responses to carbon dioxide (CO2) and N enrichment
(Lee et al. 2010). While there has been an increasing use
of meta-analysis, there is also a growing literature that is
critical, or at least cautionary, of this quantitative
approach. Indeed, Whittaker (2010) referred to metaanalyses as “mega-mistakes”, not necessarily to discourage the use of meta-analysis but to urge a more rigorous
