168 Book reviews The chapter on sediments, like those on other hydrological processes, is written in such a way that transfer to and from non-tropical forests is possible. The thoughts on processes are valuable also elsewhere. This is one of the great values of this book, that it makes the reader think in a comparative way. Tropical forest hydrology is in essence not different from any other. On the contrary, reading the book needs a certain hydrological background, in particular on views of forest ecosystems. Unfortunately there are numerous misprints which cannot all be corrected easily by the reader. Also some graphs are insufficiently labelled. The many footnotes to the tables and figures certainly give much background for a better interpretation of the data, but they slow the reading. The text in the book, on the other hand, is predominantly laid out for fluent reading with a vast amount of information in relatively little space. The reader, whether student, practitioner or scientist, will profit from this wealth of information or tropical forest hydrology. It needs some patience, but it is more than worth that. Hans M. Keller Swiss Federal Institute for Forest, Snow and Landscape Research, Birmensdorf, Switzerland Water Resources Development in Developing Countries by David Stephenson & Margaret S. Peterson published 1991 as Developments in Water Science no. 41 by Elsevier Science Publishers, PO Box 211, 1000 AE Amsterdam, The Netherlands; 289 + xi pp; price US$ 105.75, Dfl 185.00; ISBN 0-444-88956-6 This text promises new ideas, a broader approach, a real emphasis on the situation in and needs and needs of developing countries, and the benefits of lessons learned from the failure of multi-million dollar projects. Sadly, the ensuing, and curiously ordered, chapters fail to meet the challenge. "Irrigation works provide food and hydro-power is maintenance free, both suitable for third world areas" is the reality of this civil engineering tome. The traditional top-down approach is confirmed with the claim that "it is ... necessary ... to see how people can best adopt (sic!) to the new lifestyles thrust upon them". The irrigation chapter devotes four pages to irrigation techniques but less than a page to small scale irrigation systems. The 10% of the book on the sizing of reservoirs does not mention a developing country. The long section on stochastic methods of analysis conflicts with the next chapter which begins: "developing countries frequently have poor or non-existent data". Instrumental networks and data collection are treated theoretically with six references to the USA and mention of Kansas, the Alps, the Himalayas, California, Maryland and the Soviet Union. What of the "real emphasis" on the developing world? The greatest criticism is the book's virtual omission of groundwater. There is no chapter, or section, on this topic. Indeed, the index shows groundwater mentioned on only two pages. The current buzz words, e.g. role of women, shadow prices, environmental impacts etc., are included, but the text does not present an integrated approach either to water development or to the writing of the book itself. For example, in the chapter devoted to hydro-power, the "Case Study Economics" is theoretical, dealing only with the financial aspects of hydro and thermal sources. There is no mention of environmental impacts and costs, social disruption, disbenefits to downstream agriculture and navigation, let alone problems for women fishing downstream. A citation in the subheading suggests that the case study comes verbatim from another source. The diagrams are of poor quality and generally over-reduced. Much material is dated, such as the 1967 forecasts of world demand for water and the statistics on population growth based on 1970 and 1973 figures. The index is short and inadequate. Interestingly, it lacks any mention of sustainability which is, in fact, discussed in a dozen lines on page 77. This seems to be an "instant" book constructed from existing files. Personal 