Agric Hum Values (2008) 25:555–566
DOI 10.1007/s10460-008-9140-2

Livelihood change, farming, and managing ﬂood risk
in the Lerma Valley, Mexico
Hallie Eakin Æ Kirsten Appendini

Accepted: 9 February 2008 / Published online: 17 April 2008
Ó Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008

Abstract In face of rising ﬂood losses globally, the
approach of ‘‘living with ﬂoods,’’ rather than relying on
structural measures for ﬂood control and prevention, is
acquiring greater resonance in diverse socioeconomic
contexts. In the Lerma Valley in the state of Mexico, rapid
industrialization, population growth, and the declining
value of agricultural products are driving livelihood and
land use change, exposing increasing numbers of people to
ﬂooding. However, data collected in two case studies of
farm communities affected by ﬂooding in 2003 illustrate
that the concept of ﬂood as agricultural ‘‘hazard’’ has been
relatively recently constructed through public intervention
in river management and disaster compensation. While
farming still represents subsistence value to rural households, increasingly rural communities are relying on nonfarm income and alternative livelihood strategies. In this
context, deﬁning ﬂooding in rural areas as a private hazard
for which individuals are entitled to public protection may
be counterproductive. A different approach, in which
farmers’ long acceptance of periodic ﬂooding is combined
with valuing agricultural land for ecoservices, may enable
a more sustainable future for the region’s population.
Keywords Vulnerability Á Flood Á Livelihoods Á
Agriculture Á Mexico

H. Eakin (&amp;)
Department of Geography, University of California,
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-4060, USA
e-mail: eakin@geog.ucsb.edu
K. Appendini
´
´
Centro de Estudios Economicos, Colegio de Mexico, Mexico,
DF 10740, Mexico

Introduction
The frequency of ﬂood disasters around the world is rising
(Douben 2006). Hypotheses for this phenomenon are
numerous: increased climatic variability, the expansion of
human settlement in ﬂood plains, and land cover and land use
changes together are believed to be increasing human exposure and sensitivity to ﬂood impacts (Kundzewicz and
Kaczmarek 2000). The persistence of loss in face of increased
knowledge about the dynamics, drivers, and outcomes of
hazards may well signal a signiﬁcant lack of sustainability in
social-environmental relations, as well as a need to reconsider
the underlying principles of ﬂood management.
In Mexico’s Lerma River valley—one of the most densely
populated regions in Mexico—rural land and urban settlement
patterns are rapidly evolving, institutions are in ﬂux, and
consequently perceptions of ﬂood loss are also changing. To
date, Mexico’s approach to ﬂooding on the Lerma has been
almost exclusively structural, relying on a series of dams, river
straightening, and dredging and dike construction. Now that
the valley’s population of 2.3 million is rapidly encroaching
on what remains of the valley’s undeveloped ﬂoodplain, the
incidence of ﬂood damages is rising.
This article will illustrate how these processes are not only
altering the impacts of ﬂooding but also are changing the way
farmers value the use of their land, thus transforming their
perceptions of risk and the subjective meaning of ﬂooding in
rural areas. We draw from the rich history of hazards
research to explore how evolving livelihood strategies and
the consequent shift in the role of agriculture in the Upper
Lerma Valley may provide insights into the meaning of ﬂood
losses to rural populations, and thus new opportunities for
ﬂood management. Hazards—or events with the potential to
create harm—are very real phenomenon of the natural and
built environment. Nevertheless, the meaning of harm and

123

556

loss has a signiﬁcant subjective component and thus varies
among individuals and from place to place (Hewitt 1997).
Understanding this subjective experience is not only necessary to ensure that policy effectively addresses the needs of
vulnerable populations, but also, as we argue here, is necessary to enable more effective and ﬂexible policy solutions
to evolving risk.1
Building on the tradition of political ecology in hazard
research, we illustrate the implications of livelihood change,
agricultural policy reforms, and urbanization for the experience of ﬂooding in two rural communities in central
Mexico. The current policy framework in the region presents
an un-nuanced view of ﬂooding as a rural hazard producing
losses in need of compensation. This relatively narrow perspective misses the policy opportunities that might emerge
from a more subtle understanding of the changing relationship of farmers to ﬂood risk. Acting on such opportunities is
not only critical in the context of the current high frequency
of ﬂooding in the Lerma River valley, but also important in
light of the possibility of increased rainfall intensity with
˜
global warming (Magana et al. 2005).
In the next section, we describe insights into ﬂood
vulnerability and management that have emerged from
political ecology and hazards literatures. We follow this
