Resilience and recovery potential of duneland vegetation
in the southern Kalahari
ABINASH BHATTACHAN,1,  PAOLO D’ODORICO,1 KEBONYETHATA DINTWE,2 GREGORY S. OKIN,2
AND
1

SCOTT L. COLLINS3

Department of Environmental Sciences, University of Virginia, Box 400123, Charlottesville, Virginia 22904-4123 USA
2
Department of Geography, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095 USA
3
Department of Biology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131 USA

Citation: Bhattachan, A., P. D’Odorico, K. Dintwe, G. S. Okin, and S. L. Collins. 2014. Resilience and recovery potential of
duneland vegetation in the southern Kalahari. Ecosphere 5(1):2. http://dx.doi.org/10.1890/ES13-00268.1

Abstract. Many dune fields around the world have undergone alternating periods of mobilization and
stabilization in response to changes in wind power and rainfall. However, in modern times disturbances
associated with land use are believed to be a dominant factor contributing to the activation of stabilized
vegetated dunes in drylands, while the reduction in human activities such as grazing and farming may
lead to stabilization of once active dune fields. The Kalahari region of southern Africa has recently begun to
exhibit visible signs of dune mobilization, a process that could lead to an activation of aeolian transport in
the region with important implications for the biogeochemistry of downwind terrestrial and marine
ecosystems. It is still unclear whether the region is poised at a tipping point between its current state (i.e.,
vegetated fixed linear dunes), and a ‘‘degraded’’ state (i.e., barren and active dunes). Here we investigate
the ability of the landscape to recover from the degraded state by assessing the resilience of duneland
vegetation and evaluating the vegetation and soil characteristics. Using field observations and soil seed
bank experiments, we show that palatable perennial grass cover is reduced while the seedbank is depleted
on grazed dunefields. Conversely, the interdunes generally exhibit relatively rich seed banks. Soils from
grazed and ungrazed sites show that plant available nutrient contents are not significantly different;
therefore, soil nutrients are likely not a major factor limiting the recovery of perennial vegetation in this
region. It is observed that the perennial grasses reestablish on the recovering dunes after grazers have been
excluded, indicating that the landscape is still able to recover after years of denudation and that any
irreversible shift to a stable degraded state is likely during extended periods of disturbance and/or climatic
shifts that promote the degraded state. We also find that changes in grass cover, grass community
composition, and seed bank can serve as indicators of whether the system has irreversibly shifted from a
vegetated to a bare dune state.
Key words: dune reactivation; feedbacks; overgrazing; seed bank; southern Kalahari; vegetation recovery.
Received 26 August 2013; revised 15 November 2013; accepted 19 November 2013; published 10 January 2014.
Corresponding Editor: S. Ravi.
Copyright: Ó 2014 Bhattachan et al. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author and source are credited. http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/
  E-mail: ab2vb@virginia.edu

INTRODUCTION

Tsoar 2005) but water availability also plays an
important role (e.g., Sarnthein 1978, Lancaster
1988, Forman et al. 1995, Thomas et al. 2005,
Telfer and Thomas 2007). Dunes transform from
stable (vegetated, immobilized) to active (bare,

Aeolian activity is a major factor limiting
vegetation establishment and growth on sand
dunes (Tsoar 1990, Tsoar and Blumberg 2002,
v www.esajournals.org

1

January 2014 v Volume 5(1) v Article 2

BHATTACHAN ET AL.

mobile) form after vegetation cover is reduced
beyond a critical percentage vegetation cover.
This process is called ‘‘reactivation’’; the reverse
is known as ‘‘stabilization’’. It has been suggested
that disturbances associated with land use can
also reactivate dunes in places with low wind
power (Yizhaq et al. 2007, 2009). In many cases,
the reactivation of dunefields occurs over shorter
temporal scales and is attributed to anthropogenic pressure, especially from grazing and
farming. For instance, in the Negev Desert, along
the Israel - Egypt border, the Israeli side now has
dunes that are stabilized by vegetation while on
the Egyptian side dunes are mobile because of
overgrazing. Since the establishment of the
border in 1982, wood gathering and grazing
stopped in the Israeli side and dunes were
restabilized within two years (Yizhaq et al.
2007). Similar management practices were introduced in the coastal dunes of Israel in 1949, and
the dunes became stable and vegetation cover
increased from 4.3% to 17% between 1944 and
1995 (Tsoar and Blumberg 2002).
Vegetation establishment and growth appear
to be limited by a number of factors, including
loss of soil resources resulting from the intensification of wind erosion and dust emissions from
reactivated dunefields (Tsoar 1990, 2005, Duran
and Herrmann 2006, Barchyn and Hugenholtz
2012a). Most of these factors could act in a
positive feedback with the loss of vegetation
(e.g., D’Odorico et al. 2013). For instance, the
decrease in vegetation cover causes an intensification of soil erosion; the associated loss of soil
resources may impede vegetation recovery (Okin
et al. 2006, Turnbull et al. 2008). Moreover,
recovery of vegetation may also be seed- or
propagule- (e.g., bud bank) limited. Dune vegetation can mitigate against negative effects of
erosion through vegetative propagation (Liu et
al. 2012, 2013). Likewise, the feedbacks between
