 AHMAD et al. / Int. J. Agric. Biol., Vol. 14, No. 6, 2012  1000 wallichiana, Q. incana and Abies pindrow are under high fuel wood pressure, and are being eradicated at an alarming rate. One of the major considerations in this regard is the re-introduction of these tree species by the Forest department C. deodara has been declared as national symbol of Pakistan due to its graceful profile and termite resistant wood.  Medicinal plants like S. lappa, A. heterophyllum, G. wallichianum, J. dolomiaea, A. bracteosa, B. amplexicaule, and B. lyceum are on the verge of extinction due to high rate of consumption (Khan, 2008). Morel collection is an important activity during spring season. The villagers take keen interest in collection of morels as it provides them a source of income. The moist temperate Himalaya of Pakistan requires special attention for the conservation of environment and the sustainable use of natural resources. The decrease in forest cover and associated major changes in community composition has led to the decline of indigenous medicinal plants resources and their traditional knowledge (Ibrar, 2003). Endemic and rare taxa of an area are the most vulnerable because of restricted geographic ranges and specific habitats (Haq et al., 2010). The plant communities in the study area have been largely disturbed due to deforestation for fuel, over consumption of medicinal resources for the treatment of diseases, population explosion, increased tourism and lack of awareness (Khan, 2008). Indiscriminate cutting, not only the forest area is declining, but valuable indigenous species are in danger and if this inclination continues, the ultimate result would be the extinction of these species from the area.   CONCLUSION   In Sharda (Neelum valley), the plant communities have been largely disturbed due to deforestation for fuel, over consumption of medicinal resources for the treatment of diseases, population explosion, increased tourism and other environmental hazards. Due to indiscriminate cutting, not only the forest area is declining but valuable indigenous species are in danger and if this inclination continues, the ultimate result would be the extinction of these species from the area. Hence, direct conservation measures as proposed below are urgently required in order to protect the taxon from extinction. These include, (i) proper documentation and conservation of indigenous knowledge need to be done, (ii) appropriate training of the local communities about the conservation and sustainable utilization of medicinally important flora needs to be given, (iii) overgrazing and deforestation should be abridged, (iv) permanent monitoring programs should be developed, (v) natural gas should be introduced in the area as an alternate fuel source, (vi) promote forest management practices that benefit biodiversity conservation, (vii) proper health facilities should be provided to local people, and (viii) awareness programs at grass root level should be introduced. Acknowledgement: We are thankful to the local communities for their willingness to share valuable empirical knowledge and experiences on wild medicinal plants.   REFERENCES  Alam, G. and J. Belt, 2004. Searching Synergy: Stakeholder Views on Developing a Sustainable Medicinal Plant Chain in Uttaranchal, p: 102. India Alam, J. and S.I. Ali, 2009. Conservation Status of Astragalus gilgitensis Ali (Fabaceae): A Critically Endangered Species in the Gilgit District, Pakistan. Phyton, 48: 211225 Ali, S.I. and Y.J. Nasir, 1990-1992. Flora of Pakistan. Department of Botany, University of Karachi, Karachi and National Herbarium, PARC, Islamabad Ali, H. and M. Qaiser, 2010. Contribution to the Red List of Pakistan: A case study of Astragalus gahiratensis Ali (Fabaceae-Papilionoideae). Pakistan J. Bot., 42: 15231528 Ali, S.I. and M. Qaiser, 1992-2007. Flora of Pakistan. Department of Botany, University of Karachi and National Herbarium, PARC, Islamabad, Pakistan Chaudhary, M.S.A., A. Ali, H. Sher and S. Malik, 2000. Technical Report on Market study of Medicinal plants of Malakand, Peshawar, Lahore and Krachi. SDC-Interco operation, Peshawar, Pakistan Chaudhri, M. and R. Qureshi, 1991. Pakistan Endangered Flora II: A Checklist of rare and seriously threatened taxa of Pakistan. Pakistan Syst., 5: 184 Cunningham, A.B., 1996. Professional Ethics and Ethnobotanical Research. In: Alexiades, M.N. and J.W. Sheldon (eds.), Selected Guidelines for Ethnobotanical Research: A Field Manual, pp: The New York Botanical Garden, Bronx, New York, USA Dar, M.E.U., 2003. Ethnobotanical use of Lawat district Muzaffarabad, Azad Jamu and Kashmir. Asian J. Plant Sci., 2: 680682 Haq, F., H. Ahmad and M. Alam, 2010. M. Phil. Thesis, on Species Diversity of Vascular Plants of Nandiar Khuwar Battagram Ibrar, M., 2003. Conservation of Indigenous Medicinal Plants and their Traditional Knowledge found in Moist Temperate Himalaya Pakistan. Department of Biological Sciences/ Quaid-I-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan IUCN, 2001. IUCN Red List Categories and Criteria: Version 3.1 IUCN Species Survival Commission, Vol. 2, p: 30. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland and Cambridge, UK IUCN, 2008. IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. www.iucnredlist.org cited on March 02, 2008 Khan, M.A., 2008. Biodiversity and Ethnobotany of Himalayan Region Poonch Valley Azad Kashmir Pakistan. Ph. D. Thesis, Department of Botany, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad Morgan, W.T., 1981. Ethnobotany of the Turkana: Use of Plants by a Pastoral People and their Livestock in Kenya. J. Econ. Bot., 35: 96130 Muhammad, S., 2003. Resource Management Plan Hillan-Battagram forests, Azad Kashmir, Pakistan Nasir, E. and S.I. Ali, 1970-1989. Flora of Pakistan. National Herbarium, PARC, Islamabad, Pakistan Nasir, Y.J., 1991. Threatened Plants of Pakistan. In: Ali, S.I. and A. Ghaffa (eds.) Plant Life of South Asia: Proceedings of the International Symposium Karachi, pp: 229234 Shinwari, Z.K., S.S. Gilani and M. Shoukat, 2002. Ethnobotanical resources and implications for curriculum. In: Shinwari, Z.K., A. Hamilton and A.A. Khan (eds.), Proceedings of Workshop on Curriculum Development in Applied Ethnobotany, May, 2-4, Nathiagali, Abbotabad, WWF, Pakistan  (Received 11 July 2012; Accepted 10 September 2012) 