Oecologia (2014) 175:293–303
DOI 10.1007/s00442-014-2895-9

Community ecology - Original research

Loss of a large grazer impacts savanna grassland plant
communities similarly in North America and South Africa
Stephanie Eby · Deron E. Burkepile · Richard W. S. Fynn · Catherine E. Burns · Navashni Govender ·
Nicole Hagenah · Sally E. Koerner · Katherine J. Matchett · Dave I. Thompson · Kevin R. Wilcox ·
Scott L. Collins · Kevin P. Kirkman · Alan K. Knapp · Melinda D. Smith 

Received: 26 July 2013 / Accepted: 22 January 2014 / Published online: 20 February 2014
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014

Abstract Large herbivore grazing is a widespread disturbance in mesic savanna grasslands which increases herbaceous plant community richness and diversity. However,
humans are modifying the impacts of grazing on these
ecosystems by removing grazers. A more general understanding of how grazer loss will impact these ecosystems is
hampered by differences in the diversity of large herbivore
assemblages among savanna grasslands, which can affect
the way that grazing influences plant communities. To
avoid this we used two unique enclosures each containing
a single, functionally similar large herbivore species. Specifically, we studied a bison (Bos bison) enclosure at Konza
Prairie Biological Station, USA and an African buffalo
(Syncerus caffer) enclosure in Kruger National Park, South
Africa. Within these enclosures we erected exclosures
in annually burned and unburned sites to determine how

grazer loss would impact herbaceous plant communities,
while controlling for potential fire-grazing interactions. At
both sites, removal of the only grazer decreased grass and
forb richness, evenness and diversity, over time. However,
in Kruger these changes only occurred with burning. At
both sites, changes in plant communities were driven by
increased dominance with herbivore exclusion. At Konza,
this was caused by increased abundance of one grass species, Andropogon gerardii, while at Kruger, three grasses,
Themeda triandra, Panicum coloratum, and Digitaria eriantha increased in abundance.
Keywords  Disturbance · Fire · Grazing · Plant
community richness · Species diversity

Introduction
Communicated by Truman Young.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this
article (doi:10.1007/s00442-014-2895-9) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users.
S. Eby (*) · S. E. Koerner · K. R. Wilcox · A. K. Knapp ·
M. D. Smith 
Graduate Degree Program in Ecology, Department of Biology,
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA
e-mail: Sleby@syr.edu
D. E. Burkepile 
Marine Sciences Program, Department of Biological Sciences,
Florida International University, Miami, FL, USA
R. W. S. Fynn 
Okavango Research Institute, Maun, Botswana
C. E. Burns 
San Francisco Bay Bird Observatory, Milpitas, CA, USA

Grazing by large herbivores is recognized as an integral
disturbance in mesic (&gt;500 mm) grassland and savanna
ecosystems (hereafter referred to as savanna grasslands,

N. Govender 
Scientific Services, Kruger National Park, Skukuza, South Africa
N. Hagenah · K. J. Matchett · D. I. Thompson · K. P. Kirkman 
School of Life Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal,
Pietermaritzburg, South Africa
D. I. Thompson 
South African Environmental Observation Network, Ndlovu
Node, Scientific Services, Kruger National Park, Phalaborwa,
South Africa
S. L. Collins 
Department of Biology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque,
NM, USA

13

	
294

sensu Scholes and Archer 1997). Mesic savanna grasslands
are found in both the northern and southern hemispheres,
and irrespective of location, large herbivore grazing has
been shown to increase plant community diversity and
heterogeneity (McNaughton 1976; Collins 1987; Hartnett et al. 1996; Titshall et al. 2000; Frank 2005; Anderson
et al. 2007; Collins and Calabrese 2012). Large herbivore
grazing in mesic savanna grasslands has been altered in a
number of ways by human activities, including the replacement of diverse native herbivore assemblages with a small
number of herbivore species (domesticated livestock) or the
removal of large herbivores altogether (Sinclair and Fryxell 1985; Archer 1989). Comparative studies are critical in
order to gain a more general understanding of the impacts
of these herbivore losses on ecosystems worldwide.
However, generalizations about the impact of herbivore
loss on plant community structure (diversity, richness,
evenness) are hampered by the fact that mesic savanna
grasslands differ in evolutionary history, soil fertility,
plant community composition and most importantly, large
herbivore assemblages. While both North American and
Southern African mesic savanna grasslands were historically grazed by multiple large herbivore species, currently
grazing by a diversity of species occurs only in Southern
African protected savanna grasslands. Studies suggest that
different herbivore assemblages affect plant community
