bs_bs_banner

Journal of Agrarian Change, Vol. 14 No. 1, January 2014, pp. 26–51.

Agrarian Winners of Neoliberal Reform:
The ‘Maize Boom’ of Sinaloa, Mexico
HALLIE EAKIN, JULIA C. BAUSCH AND STUART SWEENEY

While the detrimental impact of neoliberal policy on Mexico’s maize smallholders is well
researched, little attention has been paid to the rise of maize in the northern state of
Sinaloa. Sinaloa’s entry into maize has restructured the geography of national supply, and
generated a new national conﬁdence in white maize self-sufﬁciency. Using semi-structured
interviews and secondary data, we document the primary social and political drivers of
Sinaloa’s maize boom. Local actors trumpet Sinaloa’s response as a success story of
entrepreneurship and technological innovation, while simultaneously appropriating the language of food sovereignty to justify preferential entitlements in public investment. Our
analysis conﬁrms interpretations of neoliberalism as a political project, illustrating how
existing natural, social and political capital held by speciﬁc interest groups can be leveraged
and reinforced through private–public partnerships to mould national policy and investment,
and the potential vulnerabilities that may emerge from this process.
Keywords: agriculture, maize, Mexico, neoliberalism

INTRODUCTION
The past two decades of research on neoliberalism and associated ‘free-market’ reform programmes in Latin America have repeatedly conﬁrmed that ‘actual existing neoliberalism’
(Brenner and Theodore 2002) often looks quite different from the policy ideals articulated in
the Washington Consensus (Williamson 1993), or by Milton Friedman or other prominent
theorists associated with the dissemination of neoliberal thought in approaches to Latin
American governance. Broadly speaking, neoliberal economic and political thought focuses on
deregulation and decentralization of decision-making, and privatization and the ‘unfettering’ of
market transactions and the promotion of free trade in order to generate growth and prosperity
(Harvey 2005; Liverman and Vilas 2006).
For agricultural policy in Latin America, the embrace of neoliberalism has typically entailed
restructuring and reconciling sector programmes to be reﬂective of macroeconomic neoliberal

Hallie Eakin, Associate Professor, School of Sustainability, Arizona State University, 800 S. Cady Mall, PO Box
875502, Mail code 5502, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA. E-mail: Hallie.Eakin@asu.edu. Julia C. Bausch, Ph.D. student,
School of Sustainability, Arizona State University, 800 S. Cady Mall, PO Box 875502, Mail code 5402, Tempe,
AZ 85287, USA. E-mail: jcbausch@asu.edu. Stuart Sweeney, Associate Professor, Department of Geography,
University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-4060, USA. E-mail: Sweeney@geog.ucsb.edu
The research presented in this manuscript was funded by a grant from the National Science Foundation Grant
No. 0826871. Any opinions, ﬁndings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the National Science Foundation (NSF). The authors are
very appreciative of the detailed comments of the anonymous reviewers, which signiﬁcantly improved the
manuscript.We are also grateful for the time and assistance provided to us in Sinaloa by the number of individuals
we interviewed in this project, and by Maria Guadalupe Quijada and Jose Luis Armenta who supported the data
collection process.
© 2013 John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd

doi: 10.1111/joac.12005

Neoliberal Reform: The ‘Maize Boom’ of Sinaloa, Mexico 27
principles and objectives, rather than the development of a separate ‘neoliberal’ agenda for
agricultural growth and productivity (de Janvry et al. 1997b). This effort of restructuring has
meant signiﬁcant reform in the role of the state in farm and rural policy across Latin America:
from a relatively activist role in setting prices, promoting speciﬁc product growth, and subsidizing access to ﬁnance and inputs to one in which the state is primarily focused on facilitating
market transactions and intervening where markets fail (de Janvry et al. 1997b). Thus, in
practice, the era of neoliberalism has not necessarily been characterized by less government
(although state retrenchment has widely occurred) but, rather, the ‘re-invention’ of public-sector
relationships to private actors and civil society through diverse and often complex processes of
‘re-regulation’ (Snyder 1999, 2001; Martin 2005; Radcliffe 2005). The reorientation of agricultural policy has had distributive implications: some populations have found new opportunities to prosper and excel, while others have struggled to maintain relevance and position in
changing domestic and international markets (Thorpe 1997; Spoor 2000; Liverman and Vilas
2006). Neoliberalism was in its heyday in the 1990s. Nevertheless, the legacy of the institutional
reforms of that decade continue to shape development processes today – particularly in relation
to which actors have been able to use the opportunity of structural reform to actively
participate in and shape the evolution of policy processes, and which actors have not.
Maize (Zea mays) has been the key protagonist in Mexico’s three-decade engagement
with neoliberal ideas, policy and processes. Maize is an iconic crop in Mexico, traditionally
valued for its cultural, political and social symbolism and history as much as an economic
commodity (Warman 2002). By all accounts, the decade of the 1990s was pivotal in Mexican
agrarian history, as Mexico moved rapidly to dismantle some of the entitlements and interventions that had long characterized the agricultural sector, in favour of an explicit emphasis
on trade, commercialization and agroindustry (Rello and Pérez 1996). The scope and implications of the overtly neoliberal shift in the orientation of macroeconomic policy, and the
implications for the agricultural sector and for rural populations, have been the subject of
continual discussion and analysis (e.g. Liverman and Vilas 2006), with the vast majority of
accounts documenting the negative impacts that the policy reforms have had on smallholder
livelihoods and prospects for smallholder maize production (e.g. Hewitt de Alcántara 1994;
de Janvry et al. 1997a; Cornelius and Myhre 1998). Much of the literature has speciﬁcally
focused on the combined impact of domestic policy restructuring, the North American Free
Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and increased maize imports from the United States (USA) on
Mexico’s maize system, documenting the input/output ‘price squeeze’ that many smallholder
producers faced in the 1990s as federal input subsidies were redesigned, and the government
reduced credit and marketing opportunities for small-scale grain farmers (de Janvry et al.
1995; Eakin 2006). Increased migration and ‘feminization’ of the countryside (Preibisch et al.
2002; Appendini 2010), land abandonment and forest transition (Klooster 2003), enhanced
livelihood sensitivity to environmental shocks (Eakin 2006) and erosion of agrobiodiversity
and cultural practice (e.g. Nadal 2000) have all been associated with this era of policy
reform.
Nevertheless, over the same era (1990–present) the volume of maize grown in Mexico has
increased by 67 per cent and the national area planted in maize has been relatively constant
(Sweeney et al. 2012). According to the most recent census data, approximately 27.6 per cent of
agricultural land in Mexico is farmed in maize, and nearly 2.8 million farmers – largely
smallholders with less than 5 ha – are dedicated to the crop (INEGI 2011;Appendini 2012). From
negligible maize production in the 1980s, the north-western coastal state of Sinaloa (Figure 1)
now supplies nearly a quarter of the country’s white maize (SIAP 2010). High-yielding maize is
now a monoculture in the state, occupying as much as 90 per cent of the planted area in some
© 2013 John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd

28 Hallie Eakin, Julia C. Bausch and Stuart Sweeney
Figure 1 Average annual maize production in Sinaloa from 2005 to 2009, by municipio

Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from INEGI (2011) and SIAP (2010).
Note: The greyscale colours shown in the ﬁgure vary continuously with the maximum of 1.2 million
metric tons shaded pure black and 0 output as pure white. Intermediate values of output as
