Ecology, 95(4), 2014, pp. 808–816
Ó 2014 by the Ecological Society of America

Plant community response to loss of large herbivores differs
between North American and South African savanna grasslands
SALLY E. KOERNER,1,9 DERON E. BURKEPILE,2 RICHARD W. S. FYNN,3 CATHERINE E. BURNS,4 STEPHANIE EBY,1
NAVASHNI GOVENDER,5 NICOLE HAGENAH,6 KATHERINE J. MATCHETT,6 DAVE I. THOMPSON,6,7 KEVIN R. WILCOX,1
SCOTT L. COLLINS,8 KEVIN P. KIRKMAN,6 ALAN K. KNAPP,1 AND MELINDA D. SMITH1
1

Reports

Department of Biology and Graduate Degree Program in Ecology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado 80523 USA
2
Marine Sciences Program, Department of Biological Sciences, Florida International University, 3000 NE 151st St,
North Miami, Florida 33181 USA
3
Okavango Research Institute, Private Bag 285, Maun, Botswana
4
San Francisco Bay Bird Observatory, 524 Valley Way, Milpitas, California 95035 USA
5
Scientiﬁc Services, Kruger National Park, Private Bag X402, Skukuza 1350 South Africa
6
School of Life Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Private Bag X01, Scottsville, Pietermaritzburg 3209 South Africa
7
South African Environmental Observation Network (SAEON), Ndlovu Node, Scientiﬁc Services, Kruger National Park,
Private Bag X1021, Phalaborwa 1390 South Africa
8
Department of Biology, MSC03-2020, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131 USA

Abstract. Herbivory and ﬁre shape plant community structure in grass-dominated
ecosystems, but these disturbance regimes are being altered around the world. To assess the
consequences of such alterations, we excluded large herbivores for seven years from mesic
savanna grasslands sites burned at different frequencies in North America (Konza Prairie
Biological Station, Kansas, USA) and South Africa (Kruger National Park). We hypothesized
that the removal of a single grass-feeding herbivore from Konza would decrease plant
community richness and shift community composition due to increased dominance by grasses.
Similarly, we expected grass dominance to increase at Kruger when removing large herbivores,
but because large herbivores are more diverse, targeting both grasses and forbs, at this study
site, the changes due to herbivore removal would be muted. After seven years of largeherbivore exclusion, richness strongly decreased and community composition changed at
Konza, whereas little change was evident at Kruger. We found that this divergence in response
was largely due to differences in the traits and numbers of dominant grasses between the study
sites rather than the predicted differences in herbivore assemblages. Thus, the diversity of large
herbivores lost may be less important in determining plant community dynamics than the
functional traits of the grasses that dominate mesic, disturbance-maintained savanna
grasslands.
Key words: disturbance; diversity; ﬁre; forb; grass; grazing; herbaceous community; herbivory; Konza
Prairie, Kansas, USA; Kruger National Park, South Africa; large-herbivore exclusion; richness.

INTRODUCTION
Multiple disturbances shape herbaceous plant community composition and dynamics of mesic (.500 mm
MAP [mean annual precipitation] in the tropics and
.600 mm MAP outside the tropics; Bond et al. 2003)
grasslands and savannas globally, hereafter referred to
as savanna grasslands (sensu Scholes and Walker 1993),
with ﬁre and grazing considered key, shared drivers of
these systems (Knapp et al. 2004). Moderate grazing by
large herbivores generally increases plant community
diversity in mesic savanna grasslands, subject to various
contingencies, such as climate, productivity, grazing
intensity, and herbivore diversity (Milchunas et al. 1988,
Olff and Ritchie 1998, Bakker et al. 2006). Furthermore,
Manuscript received 21 November 2013; accepted 26
November 2013. Corresponding Editor: G. A. Fox.
9 E-mail: sally.koerner@colostate.edu
808

the effects of grazing may interact with ﬁre to create
higher levels of plant diversity and heterogeneity than
under either disturbance alone (Collins and Smith 2006,
Koerner and Collins 2013).
Human activities are altering these key disturbances in
savanna grasslands worldwide (Reid and Ellis 1995,
Fuhlendorf and Engle 2001), with important consequences for ecosystem diversity, structure, and function.
Indeed, nearly half of the world’s large herbivores are
threatened with extinction (IUCN 2013), with local,
often diverse, native herbivore fauna eliminated and, in
many regions, replaced by a single domesticated grazer.
In addition, most savanna grasslands have experienced
substantial alterations in natural ﬁre frequency, ranging
from complete ﬁre suppression to annual burning and
changes in the seasonality of ﬁres, all with corresponding effects on ﬁre intensity (e.g., Smith et al. 2012).
Comparative studies focusing on the implications of
large-herbivore loss and how these impacts vary with

April 2014

PLANT COMMUNITIES AND HERBIVORE LOSS

809

PLATE 1. Exclosure located at Konza Praire, Kansas, USA, in annually burned grassland. The vegetation difference inside and
outside the exclosure is evident with the tall dominant C4 grass, Andropogon gerardii, ﬂowering inside the exclosure and higher forb
cover outside. Photo credit: A. K. Knapp.

forbs, 50% and 80%, respectively (du Toit 2003).
Presumably, like bison, grass-eating herbivores reduce
grass dominance and increase diversity; however, the
presence of forb-eating herbivores simultaneously decreases diversity (Skinner and Chimimba 2005).
To assess the impacts on herbaceous plant communities of losing native large herbivores and to determine if
these impacts vary with herbivore diversity and ﬁre
