Rangeland Ecol Manage 67:621–628 | November 2014 | DOI: 10.2111/REM-D-13-00133.1

Chihuahuan Desert Grassland Responds Similarly to Fall, Spring, and Summer Fires
During Prolonged Drought
Laura M. Ladwig,1 Scott L. Collins,2 Paulette L. Ford,3 and Laura B. White4
Authors are 1Graduate Student and 2Professor, Department of Biology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA; 3Research Ecologist,
Rocky Mountain Research Station, USDA Forest Service, Albuquerque, NM 87102, USA; and 4High School Science Teacher, Albuquerque Public Schools,
Albuquerque, NM 87110, USA.

Abstract
Land managers frequently use prescribed burning to help maintain grassland communities. Semiarid grassland dynamics
following ﬁre are linked to precipitation, with increasing soil moisture accelerating the rate of recovery. Prescribed ﬁres are
typically scheduled to follow natural ﬁre regimes, but burning outside the natural ﬁre season could be equally effective and more
convenient for managers, depending on their management objectives. We conducted a ﬁeld experiment in desert grassland to
determine if ﬁre seasonality inﬂuenced plant community recovery. Experimental burn treatments occurred in fall, spring, and
summer in replicate 0.24-ha plots to determine if ﬁre seasonality affected the rate of recovery of an ungrazed Chihuahuan Desert
grassland in central New Mexico. Plant communities were surveyed seasonally for 5 yr after the burns. Grassland community
structure responded to ﬁre but not ﬁre seasonality. Grass cover in all burned treatments remained lower than unburned controls
for 3 yr after the burns. Community change through time was largely inﬂuenced by low rainfall, as grass cover in burned and
unburned communities converged during a year with severe drought. In conclusion, ﬁre seasonality did not inﬂuence rate of
community recovery, but extended drought was possibly more inﬂuential than ﬁre on grassland dynamics.
Key Words:

black grama, Bouteloua eriopoda, ﬁre seasonality, semiarid grassland

INTRODUCTION
Grasses are a critical component of rangeland function. Both
natural phenomena and poor management practices can
compromise grassland integrity, and maintaining semiarid
grassland vegetation remains a challenge for rangeland
managers. Fire frequently shapes and maintains grass-dominated communities (Pausas and Ribeiro 2013) and is often used
as a management tool due to its affordability, effectiveness, and
speed of treatment (Teague et al. 2001, 2008). Prescribed ﬁres
are effective in mesic grasslands where ﬁre stimulates productivity (Knapp and Seastedt 1986), yet in semiarid grasslands
lower water availability leads to decreased, patchy fuel loads
and longer ﬁre-return intervals. As aridity increases, the
magnitude of ecosystem beneﬁts of ﬁre decrease, and often
semiarid plant communities are neutrally or negatively
impacted by ﬁre (Scheintaub et al. 2009). Several years might
be necessary for semiarid vegetation recovery (Gosz and Gosz
1996; Parmenter 2008), and many impacts of ﬁre on semiarid
grasslands can be unpredictable (Scheintaub et al. 2009; Pastro
et al. 2011). A better understanding of community response to
prescribed ﬁre is needed to help managers create optimal ﬁre
management practices within semiarid rangelands.
Research was funded in part by an NSF grant to the University of New Mexico for LongTerm Ecological Research and by a grant from the USDA Forest Service National Fire
Plan.
Correspondence: Laura M. Ladwig, Dept of Biology, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA. Email: LLadwig@sevilleta.unm.edu
Manuscript received 2 September 2013; manuscript accepted 2 May 2014.
ª 2014 The Society for Range Management

RANGELAND ECOLOGY &amp; MANAGEMENT 67(6) November 2014

Water availability greatly inﬂuences desert grassland recovery (Drewa and Havstad 2001; Scheintaub et al. 2009; Pastro et
al. 2011), and higher soil moisture after ﬁre leads to faster grass
recovery (Drewa et al. 2006). Total precipitation is low and
variable within and between years in semiarid systems
(Dettinger et al. 2011), therefore recovery from ﬁre is
frequently inconsistent between years or sites. Because response
to ﬁre is linked to variable precipitation patterns and ﬁre can
negatively impact semiarid systems (Gosz and Gosz 1996;
Scheintaub et al. 2009), studying the intricacies of semiarid
community response to ﬁre is critical for effective ﬁre
management.
The timing of ﬁre with regard to the growing season can
impact community response. Within semiarid grasslands of the
southwestern United States, perennial grasses predominantly
grow during the monsoon season (Muldavin et al. 2008) and
natural wildﬁres generally occur in early summer before the
monsoon, when lightning ignites dry grasses (Parmenter 2008).
In more mesic (mean annual precipitation [MAP] 665 mm)
southern prairie grasslands of northern Texas, species respond
differently to the timing of ﬁre, with summer ﬁres stimulating
long-term growth of several codominant grass species and
winter ﬁres favoring others (Ansley et al. 2006; Ansley and
Castellano 2007). Meanwhile, studies have found negative
effects of ﬁres during the growing season on Bouteloua
eriopoda (Torr.) Torr., a dominant grass of more xeric (MAP
250 mm) Chihuahuan Desert grasslands (Cable 1965; Drewa
and Havstad 2001; Parmenter 2008; Killgore et al. 2009).
However, it is unclear how prescribed ﬁres during different
times of the year affect B. eriopoda, particularly because a
related species, Bouteloua gracilis (Willd. ex Kunth) Lag. ex
Grifﬁths, is affected by timing of prescribed ﬁre. Cover of B.
gracilis, a dominant grass of the shortgrass steppe, showed little

621

Table 1. Climate and fire conditions during experimental burns. Climate measures are from 1100 through 1400 hours.
Mean air temp
Season

Date

Relative

Mean wind speed

Max wind speed

