T. A. Stone, R. F. Nelson, W. Kovalick, J. Geo-phys. Res. 92, 2157 (1987). 20. A. W. Setzer and M. C. Pereira, Ambio 20, 19 (1991); A. W. Setzer, Relatorio INPE-4534-RPU 565 (Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais, SBo Jose dos Campos, Brazil, 1988). 21. Anuario Estatistico do Brasil 1991 (Fundacao In-stituto Brasileirode Geografiae Estatistica, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 1991), vol. 51, pp. 1-1024. 22. Mapa de Vegetac.40 do Brasil (FundacBolnstituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatistica, Rio de Jan-eiro, Brazil, 1988). 23. D. L. Skole, thesis, University of New Hampshire (1992). 24. Images:7 from 1989, 175from 1988,8 from 1987, and 20 from 1986. All data from the Brazilian Landsat receiving station. The exact boundary between intact forest and deforested land was digitized in the UniversalTransverse Mercator pro-jection and then edited and error-checkedwith use of clear velum plots of the line-work overlaid on each photographic image. Each Landsat scene RESEARCH ARTICLE contained coordinate control points in decimal degree units, such that each scene could be geographically registered within precise toleranc-es and mosaicked together. For digitization, verti-ces were placed approximately every 50 m of ground position. Tests of positional accuracy in digitizingfollowed thoseof R. Dunn,R. Harrison,and J. C.White [Int. J. Geograph.Inf Syst.4,385 (1990)] and indicated encoding; hence,area-estimationer-rors were less than 3% (23).The variance associat-ed with interpretation and delineation of boundaries between intact forest and deforested areas was less than 10%overall.Further accuracyassessmentwas made in test sites established in Rondonia, where fragmentation was very high. An explicit spatial comparison between our estimate of deforestation and the same derived from high-resolution (20-117 resolution)SPOT satellite imagery was highly corre-lated (r2 = 0.98; y = 1.11~-57.358).Additional ground checking and verification was done in east-ern Para state (north of Manaus) and along the Rio Negro, both in Amazonas. Arrestin Function in Inactivation of G Protein-Coupled Receptor Rhodopsin in Vivo Patrick J. Dolph, Rama Ranganathan, Nansi J. Colley, Robert W. Hardy, Michael Socolich, Charles S. Zuker* Arrestins have been implicated in the regulation of many G protein-coupled receptor signaling cascades. Mutations in two Drosophila photoreceptor-specific arrestin genes, arrestin 1and arrestin 2, were generated. Analysis of the light response in these mutants shows that the Arrl and Arr2 proteins are mediators of rhodopsin inactivation and are essential for the termination of the phototransduction cascade in vivo. The saturation of arrestin function by an excess of activated rhodopsin is responsible for a continuously activated state of the photoreceptors known as the prolonged depolarized afterpotential. In the absence of arrestins, photoreceptorsundergo light-dependent retinal degeneration as a result of the continued activity of the phototransduction cascade. These results demonstrate the fundamental requirementfor membersof the arrestin proteinfamily in the regulation of G protein-coupled receptors and signaling cascades in vivo. Rhodopsin is a member of a class of recep-tors containing seven membrane-spanning domains that transduce extracellularsignals-to specific intracellular effector molecules through the activation of heterotrimeric guanosine triphosphate-binding proteins (G proteins). This large superfamily of pro-teins, collectively known as G protein-coupled receptors, includes receptors for a variety of environmental signals such as hormones, neurotransmitters, peptides, light, and odorants (1, 2). The events that lead to the stimulation of G protein-coupled receptors, and the subse-quent activation of their corresponding ef-fector molecules [such as adenylyl cyclase, guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cGMP) phosphodiesterase, and phospholipase C] have been well characterized (2, 3). How-ever, the mechanisms effecting the termina-tion of the activated state of these receptors and the downstream signaling molecules in vivo are not well defined. Such information is essential for an understanding of the reg-ulation of receptor function and the role of this regulation in modulating receptor-medi-ated cellular processes.The authors are in the Howard Hughes Medical Insti-tute and Departments of Biology and Neurosciences, Much of the data on mechanisms of University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA inactivation of G protein-coupled receptors 92093-0049. has come from in vitro reconstitution stud-.To whom correspondence should be addressed. ies of the p-adrenergic receptor (4, 5) and 25. Fundamental to our analysis was a specified representationfor water, cerrado or savanna, and forest for the Brazilian Amazon. We used a vege-tation map (23) that was augmented by Landsat Thematic Mapper and meteorological satellite im-agery for more accurate depiction of cerrado and water. This GIs representation is available upon request. 26. R. B. Buschbacher, BioScience 36, 22 (1986); C. Uhl, R. B. Buschbacher, E. A. S. Serrao, J. Ecol. 76, 663 (1988); R. B. Buschbacher, C. Uhl, E. A. S. Serrao, ibid., p. 682. 27. This work was supported by National Aeronautics and Space Administration'smissionto planet Earth and the Eos Data Information System's Landsat Pathfinder Program. We acknowledge S. Tilford and W. Huntress for initiating this research, W. Chomentowski for assistance in developing the satellite and GIs database, and A. Nobre for his assistance in interpreting the satellite data. G. Batista,M. Heinicke,and T. Grant assisted with the GIs representationof forest, water, and cerrado. bovine rhodopsin (6). The inactivation of metarhodo~sin. the activated state of. , rhodopsin, is thought to result from the action of at least two proteins, rhodopsin kinase and arrestin. According to this mod-el, light-activated rhodopsin is a substrate for rhodopsin kinase, which phosphorylates rhodopsin in a cluster of serine-threonine residues located in the COOH-terminal tail of the protein (7-9). The light-activated, phosphorylated rhodopsin interacts stoichi-ometrically with arrestin, an abundant cy-tosolic ~roteinthat comDetes with the G protein for receptor binding and terminates, or arrests, the activated state of the receptor (10, 11).Although this model is consistent with biochemical studies of arrestin function in vitro, little is known about the function of this protein in vivo (12). Arrestin was originally identified as an abundant, soluble 48-kD protein (also known as soluble antigen or S antigen) found in the vertebrate retinal and pineal photoreceptors (13). Human and bovine S antigen are highly immunogenic and have been linked to autoimmune disorders that affect vision (14). Functional homologs of visual arrestin have been isolated from non-retinal tissue and have been implicated in the desensitization and inactivation of the P-adrenergic receptor (p arrestins) (15-17). Similar proteins have been thought to act as mediators of the inactivation of many G protein-coupled receptors (18) and therefore. the molecular mechanisms of receptor inactivation may be shared among members of this receDtor su~erfamilv. Drosophila provides an excellent model system for studying the function of arrestin and the regulation of G protein-coupled receptors in vivo (19-2 1). Mutants with defects in key regulatory components of the phototransduction cascade can be isolated and studied genetically, physiologically, and biochemically. Phototransduction in Drosophila begins with the light activation of rhodopsin (19, 2 1). Rhodopsin consists 1910 SCIENCE VOL. 260 25 JUNE 1993 