Why Sustainability is Now the Key Driver of Innovation    Harvard Business Review : Sept. 09  Page  12  Ram Nidumolu (ram@innovastrat .com) is the founder and CEO of InnovaStrat, a Santa CruzŒbased firm that helps companies design and implement sustainability strategies and new business models. C.K. Prahalad (ckp@bus.umich.edu) is the Paul and Ruth McCracken Distinguished University Professor of Strategy at the University of Michigan™s Ross School of Business and a member of the board of directors of the World Resources Institute. M.R. Rangaswami (mr@sandhill.com) is the founder of the Corporate Eco Forum, a global organization of senior executives, and the cofounder of the Sand Hill Group, a San FranciscoŒbased strategic management, investment, and advisory firm. digital technology to manage power generation, transmission, and distribution from all types of sources along with consumer demand. The smart grid will lead to lower costs as well as the more efficient use of energy. The concept has been around for years, but the huge investments going into it today will soon make it a reality. The grid will allow companies to optimize the energy use of computers, network devices, machinery, telephones, and building equipment, through meters, sensors, and applications. It will also enable the development of cross-industry platforms to manage the energy needs of cities, companies, buildings, and households. Technology vendors such as Cisco, HP, Dell, and IBM are already investing to develop these platforms, as are utilities like Duke Energy, So Cal Edison, and Florida Power & Light. Ł Ł Ł Two enterprise wide initiatives help companies become sustainable. One: When a company™s top management team decides to focus on the problem, change happens quickly. For instance, in 2005 General Electric™s CEO, Jeff Immelt, declared that the company would focus on tackling environmental issues. Since then every GE business has tried to move up the sustainability ladder, which has helped the conglomerate take the lead in several industries. Two: Recruiting and retaining the right kind of people is important. Recent research suggests that three-fourths of workforce entrants in the United States regard social responsibility and environmental commitment as important criteria in selecting employers. People who are happy about their employers™ positions on those issues also enjoy working for them. Thus companies that try to become sustainable may well find it easier to hire and retain talent.  
Leadership and talent are critical for developing a low-carbon economy. The current economic system has placed enormous pressure on the planet while catering to the needs of only about a quarter of the people on it, but over the next decade twice that number will become consumers and producers. Traditional approaches to business will collapse, and companies will have to develop innovative solutions. That will happen only when executives recognize a simple truth: Sustainability = Innovation.  